In this video I'm going to tell you about arithmetic sequences and geometric sequences.
There are formulas associated with each of these two kinds of sequences and you are going to get to
practice in this video.
One of the most important skills in programming and mathematics which is converting a mathematical formula
into a bunch of code so let me begin by just talking about a sequence.
Well a sequence is actually really simple.
It's just an ordered list of numbers.
And if you're thinking that this is too general of a definition then.
Well I mean that is kind of the idea.
A sequence is just an ordered list of numbers.
You can come up with your own sequences.
There are many many many mathematical sequences out there.
And in this video I'm going to introduce you to two kinds of sequences arithmetic and geometric.
So the blue series of squares here shows an arithmetic sequence and the orange sequence here shows a
geometric sequence.
Now you can already see the difference.
This orange squares sequence is getting bigger with each step.
So there's clearly going to be some kind of a power function in here and the blue sequence so the arithmetic
sequence is just getting a little bit bigger on each step in fact this is a linear step.
So that's what these two sequences look like.
Here's what the formulas are.
The arithmetic sequence is you say that the end term in this sequence a the end term is defined as a
zero sometimes is called a not so a not which is actually the first number plus D times the quantity
and minus one.
D is a parameter that you can specify and you'll get to explore in the code how this parameter changes
the sequence and a not or a zero is whatever is the first number that you pick for the sequence.
So the sequence doesn't need to start at 1.
In this case I'm having both of these sequences start at 1 but you can have them start any number you
like.
They can be 1 or 3 they can start at 14 quadrillion whatever you want.
All right so that is the arithmetic sequence.
And here we have the geometric sequence so you can see that some aspects of this geometric sequence
formula are similar to the formula for the arithmetic sequence.
That's also a good skill in mathematics to be able to look at two formulas or multiple formulas and
pick apart what is similar and what is different between them.
So the end element of the geometric sequence just like the element of the arithmetic sequence is the
initial numbers so the first number you pick and then it's some parameter and then it's N minus one.
Now the difference is that here you're saying plus D times and minus one.
And here you're saying G not times are to the power of N minus one.
So these two formulas have some things in common and they also also differ in important ways.
All right.
So what we're gonna do now is switch to Python and basically write out these formulas and generate a
couple of sequences and and then reproduce this plot to do all of that we are going to use the number
pi module and the mat plot lib dot pi plot module.
So let's begin.
I'm going to define the parameters.
So a equals so this is going to be a zero.
So the number that we start with and in the slides I showed it was 1.
But maybe now I'll show it as to just for a little bit of variety and then we had D and let's just start
with D equals 3 and see what those numbers look like.
Now sequences go up to some number of numbers.
So I'm gonna call that number or that parameter Max n and let's go up to 10.
So this is going to correspond to the largest n that you saw in this formula in the slide.
So now let's start by creating the arithmetic sequence.
So I will call this Ari seek for arithmetic sequence.
Now that formula was a not so in the formula was a not.
But here I'm calling that variable a plus D times and then we want to have the numbers N minus one.
So this actually works out pretty conveniently with the way that Python counts because when we start
counting here from zero that actually corresponds to and minus one.
So let me write this out and I will explain what that means.
So a range 0 2 max.
And so this term here and let me print this out here so you can see we have Max and is 10 and then num
PI that range is going to list numbers from 0 which we specified here up to 1 minus the second input
which is Max n.
And this turns out to be our vector of N minus one.
And that's because the first element and Ari seek is going to be d times 1 minus 1 which is 0.
Let's see what this looks like.
So print Ari seek.
Okay so that's pretty interesting we can see the effect of a.
So let's try making a some different numbers.
I'm going to start with how about zero.
So now we start with zero and we can start with 10.
And now we start with 10.
So that's what this value does this parameter of a.
And now let's look at this D parameter.
Now I didn't really explain in the slides what the function of D is.
And that's because I wanted you to be able to discover this on your own using Python.
And in fact that is one of the main advantages of using python as a tool to learn mathematics.
You can stare at an equation on a piece of paper until your face turns blue.
But that's not going to guarantee that you really understand all of the parameters and all the features
of the equation.
But as soon as you can simulate an equation in Python then you can immediately start playing around
with the parameters and see what effects they have on the results.
So D is 3 and now you can see that these numbers are skipping in three so that leads me to an apotheosis
that the effect of D is to just define the skipping rate here.
And so to test that hypothesis I'm gonna try a couple of different values for D.
So for example if we go to if we start from two then we have ten twelve fourteen.
How about when do we start at one and set D to be seven then we have one eight 17 twenty two.
Okay so this seems pretty legit.
It seems like this parameter d is actually defining the skipping parameter.
Now when you look at this formula it's also not really that surprising that that's the effect but I
think it's also nice to be able to explore this empirically.
In addition to looking at a formula.
OK so that was the arithmetic sequence.
Now let's implement the geometric sequence.
So how about a equals two.
And now is that are to be equal to threes or kind of starting off the same way we started here.
So I'll call this g geo seek.
Now this one was a times.
Times are to the power of it then it was the same things.
I'm going to copy and paste that down here and then print out geo seek.
Wow.
So these numbers get really big really fast so it still starts off at 2 as predicted based on this a
being a not so let's see what happens when we start at zero.
Mm hmm.
That's interesting.
Then we get an entire vector full of zeros.
Now that didn't happen over here and looking at the formula.
That's not really surprising because here we have a plus this.
And here we have a times this of a zero.
Then of course all of this is going to become zero.
So now in a equals one it's also fairly easy to figure out what is our parameter means.
So when a is one in a sense we're just ignoring this a term altogether.
So then this geometric sequence becomes increasing powers of three so three nine twenty seven eighty
one of course is three to the power of four and so on.
So now we can set out to be two and see that these numbers are is basically two to two increasing powers.
So now when both of these parameters are set to two then essentially what we have here is the number
two to increasing powers and then all of these numbers are scaled up by two.
All right.
So what I want to do now is set both of these to have the same parameter.
Let's go back to 2 and 3.
So let's see I'll run this run that you can see these numbers are quite different.
Well of course the first number is the same.
In fact the second number is almost same.
But then they start to diverge increasingly.
And now what I'm going to do is generate a plot that shows both of them.
So let's start by plotting the arithmetic sequence and let's make this how about black squares and this
will get a label of arithmetic and then we say P L tee it up plot geos seek and let's make this red
circles and the label here will be geo metric.
All right so let's see how this looks.
Oh I need to activate the legend and then appeal to that show.
Well this grows so fast that it's even difficult to see that the black squares so the arithmetic sequence
is even increasing at all.
Maybe we should try running this again with a max and of how about six.
What you want to do in this exercise is to confirm that the tenth term in an arithmetic and geometric
sequence matches for indexing and for direct computation.
So what do I mean by that.
So essentially what you want to do is implement these two equations which we actually already just did.
So you can really just do a bit of copying and pasting and let's say you set the max.
And to be 10 now you could find the six element by indexing into that factor of ten elements.
So you say you know we get 10 A's in the sequence and what is the six A.
Or you could just implement this formula directly only for the end that you were interested in.
So for six without generating the entire sequence.
Now it's not going to be a big surprise that those two numbers will match but it is still good practice
to do this because this will help train you on indexing and converting formulas into code in Python.
All right.
So now is your opportunity to switch to Python and work through this exercise.
And then I'm going to switch to Python now and show you how I solved it.
So I am going to start by copying and pasting some of this code here.
So let's see.
First we specify the parameters and I'll keep two and three and I'll set Max and to be 10.
And now we need to figure out what is the number what is the element that we want to compute and also
to index and I'll call it variable.
And and I will write six here because I don't know that's the number that I said in the slides.
OK.
So then I'm going to compute the sequences.
So here was the arithmetic sequence and the geo metric sequence and you know what I'm gonna do here.
I'm actually going to leave all the parameters the same.
I'm just going to modify whatever needs to be changed.
So earlier this was called R and now I'm just leaving it at D.
OK.
So here we have the two sequences arithmetic and geometric.
And then we want to do the direct computation.
So by direct computation essentially we are just computing not the entire sequence but only one specific
element.
So I will call this variable Ari direct for arithmetic direct so that's gonna be a plus D times and
now it's almost similar to this line of code.
Except it's not a range.
We're not listing an entire set of numbers we're only listing the N minus one.
No.
So then for the GEO metric direct it's still the initial number a zero or what I call G zero in the
slides.
And then here.
This has to be times.
And this has to be to the power of this is also by the way an important aspect of learning how to code
mathematics in Python or any other language.
You need to be able to see past the specific names and the variables to the underlying mathematical
concepts.
So you need to be able to look at this line of code and map that back onto the formula that was g sub
N equals G not times R to the power of and minus one.
So all the letters are different but the concept is the same the formula is fundamentally the same.
Okay so then we want to compare.
So we want to see whether Ari direct is the same thing as Ari seek and then we want the end element
in this sequence.
Now before I run this code I would like you to guess whether these two are going to be the same or whether
they are going to be different.
Let's see mm mm mm.
So they seem to be different.
Have I done something wrong that I make any coding mistakes here or here.
Actually.
What's going wrong here is that I'm indexing the six hour element.
Number Six when really what I want is the six element.
And because Python starts counting at zero then this or I should say this is actually the seventh element
in this array.
So we need to say F minus one and that gives us 17.
In both cases.
All right.
So let's then try again for geo direct and geo seek and and minus one and these turned out to be the
same number in this video you learned about arithmetic sequences and geometric sequences.
And there was also another excuse to learn about an important concept in mathematical programming which
is to be able to convert between formulas and Python code.